CondaCrashCourse/README.md, before:

# Conda Crash Course

**Todo:**

- extremely preliminary and needs major editing and polishing
- Maybe one exercise could be to install git/snakemake with conda?
- It would be neat if one could create a conda environment for a decent, 
*intuitive* cross-platform text-editor that have capabilities (correct 
indentation, code-formatting, etc.) to properly handle yaml- and 
snakemake-formatted files, at least, but preferably also markdown and maybe 
also python and R/Rmarkdown. `Atom` would be an alternative, but there is no 
conda-package for atom yet. Maybe a TODO could be to create an `atom` package 
-- or find an alternative editor. (`Emacs` is actually my editor of preference, 
but that fails the *intuitive* criterium... and so does ’vim’:)
- need feedback on how this works with Windows
- [Snakemake docs](https://snakemake.readthedocs.io/en/stable/getting_started/installation.html#installation-via-conda) recommends using the conda package `mamba` instead of plain `conda` (due to current problems with conda). Should this crash course follow that? I think `mamba` is meant to be a temporary fix so could be better to stick with `conda` to no over-complicate, but if it works better?

## Introduction to `conda`

Conda is a cross-platform system for software package management.
It greatly simplifies software installation on your computer.
Moreover, it allows, in a very simple way, creating project-specific 
environments with a selection of installed programs needed for a particular 
project. Each time work is performed on the project, the environent is 
activated, and when work is done done, the environment is deactivated the 
standard software environment for system is back.

Conda works on MacOS, Windows and Unix/Linux systems. This is handy for 
reproducibility as, in principle, a script developed inside a conda environment 
on, say, a Mac laptop can be transferred to, say, a linux system on UPPMAX, the 
corresponding conda environment for linux can be created and the script can be 
used there as well.

Conda packages of programs are available from different *channels*, including 
[anaconda](https://repo.anaconda.com) (often set as the `defaults` or `main` 
channel in conda), [conda-forge](https://conda-forge.org) and 
[bioconda](https://bioconda.github.io); all (or at least the majority of) 
channels are isted in the [anaconda cloud](https://anaconda.org)). A large part 
of the available open-source bioinformatics programs are covered by these 
channels. Commercial or other programs  with restricted license can typically 
not be provided by these channels -- however, for reproducibility, open source 
programs are a more natural choice.

It should be mentioned that, while `conda` is available for MacOS, Windows and 
Unix/Linux, certain packages may not be available for all platforms. This could 
be due to the actual program being platform-specific, to difficulties to port 
the program between platforms or to channel policies (*bioconda* not supporting 
Windows?).

## Installation

Conda can be installed using the Miniconda installer. The installer is 
downloaded from [here](https://docs.conda.io/en/latest/miniconda.html); choose 
the installer appropriate for your operating system and download it.

Detailed instruction can be found [here](https://conda.io/projects/conda/en/latest/user-guide/install/index.html). 
but briefly, the downloaded file is a *bash* script or a Windows executable, 
respectably, which is executed and the user is guided through the installation.

**TODO: add info on checksums? overkill?**

Once you've followed the installation instructions the base conda environment
will be activated by default when you open up a new terminal window. You can 
see this by looking at your prompt which should be prefixed with `(base)` or
`(anaconda3)`. You can deactivate the base environment by running 
`conda deactivate` and re-activate it by running `conda activate`. Notice how
your prompt changes as you do this. See [more below](#activating-and-deactivating-an-environment) 
about activating and deactivating environments.

### Updating conda

Conda can be used to update itself, simply by typing:

```
conda update conda
```

### Local UPPMAX conda

On the UPPMAX clusters (e.g., )*rackham*, *bianca*, *snowy* and *irma*), 
`conda` is also available through the UPPMAX module system. This module provides
a *local* variant of `conda`, that i, it accesses local mirrors of the major 
bioinformatics-relevant *conda* channels (including *anaconda*, *bioconda*, and 
*conda-forge*; for a full listing do `conda config show channels`).

If your project involves human sensitive data and, hence, work on the secure 
cluster *bianca*, you will need to use this local `conda` module, as *bianca* 
does not have any internet connections. The UPPMAx local *cona* can be loaded 
(while on an UPPMAX cluster) simply by typing:

`module load conda`

Unloading the module is done by:

`module unload conda`

## Usage

### Finding a conda packages

To find out if there exists a conda packages for a certain package, the easiest 
way is actually to google `conda <package name>`. You can also search 
[Anaconda cloud](https://anaconda.org/) for packagaes 
directly. Pages for packages at *anaconda cloud* tells:

- which channel provides the packages
- which systems the package is provided for, and
- which version of the software the package provides (other versions can be 
found under the *files* tab or as described below).

`conda` itself can also be used to search for packages:

```
conda search --channel <channel> <package>
```

A drawback is that you need to tell conda what channel to search using the 
option `--channel` (although the option can be repeated in the same command to 
search in several channels at the same time, e.g., 
`conda search --channel bioconda --channel conda-forge <package>`).

#### Searching on UPPMAX

On UPPMAX, `conda` is set up to search *all* local channel mirrors, by simply 
typing:

```
conda search <package>
```

### Creating environment

Conda environments can be created indifferent ways. Since reproducibility is a 
major theme for these crash courses, we will here focus on the approach where a 
conda environment file is used. Separate conda environemnts files are used for 
separate environments. The environment file should be in `yaml` format and can 
look like this:

*file: smthg.yaml*
```
Name: smthg
# indentations are important and should be made up of spaces (soft-tabs).
channels:
  - anaconda
  - conda-forge
dependencies:
  - smthg =1.0.1
  - smthelse =1.5.3
```

Breaking down the content:
- The `name` is the name you want to call the conda environment. This could be, 
e.g., the name of the contained software or of the project it will be used in.
- Under `channels`, the channels that supply the required conda packages are 
listed. Several channels can be given, but it is good practice to only list 
those necessary -- avoid unnecessary safe-guarding!
- Finally, the required conda packages are listed under `dependencies`. Also 
here, several packages can be listed in the same file. Conda usually makes a 
good job in taking care of any incompatibilities between packages, and warns if 
it fails doing this.   
For reproducibility reasons it is good to also list the version of the software 
required. This is done by adding a ’=’ sign followed by the version (to find 
what versions are  as packages, `conda search` can be used, see above).

The conda environment is then created by

```
conda env create --file smthg.yaml
```

This will ask you to verify the installation, then perform it and report 
success or failure. Reasons for failure is most often due to:

- the name of the environment is already in use -- change environment name or 
remove the old environment (see below).
- A package is not available from the channel or not available for the 
platform (i.e., MacOS, Windows or Linux/Unix) -- correct channel or use another 
platform (e.g., UPPMAX).
- Versions of two or more packages, as required in the conda environment yaml 
file, are not compatible -- try with other versions. For example, a common 
incompatibility is that one package is built for `python 2` and another is built
 for `python 3` -- these are not compatible.

When setting up an environment for a new project it can be a good idea to 
**not** set explicit versions for packages, unless you know beforehand that your
project requires a specific version. This way you can let conda attempt to 
install the most up to date compatible versions for the listed packages. Once 
the environment is created you can update the environment file with the exact
versions that were installed (use `conda list` to see package versions for the
activated environment).

### Activating and deactivating an environment

A succesfully installed conda environment is activated by typing:

```
conda activate smthg
```

However, often `conda` will complain that it is not initiated for bash. this is 
done by typing:

```
conda init bash
```

Then retry the activation command. Now you will have access to the programs 
provided by the conda environment. You will also have access to the standard 
programs of your system, but if you have the same program in your standard 
system and in your conda environment, the one in the conda environment will be 
used.

The conda environment is deactivated by typing:

```
conda deactivate
```

The standard environment is then restored and the conda environment's software 
is not accessible.

### Updating an environment

To add additional packages to an environment:

1. First update the conda environment files in question by adding additional 
packages (and channels as needed) or change the version of existing packages.
2. Then type:

```
conda env update --file smthg.yaml
```

and the environment will be updated.


### Deleting an environment

Sometimes an outdated environment needs to be deleted. This is done by typing:

```
conda env remove --name smthg
```

`conda` then asks for verification, then deletes the environment and reports 
back.

### Keeping your conda clean

By default, conda saves all downloaded software tarballs (archives of source 
code), redundant packages (e.g., older, replaced versions) and index-cache 
because, in case they are needed, it might save a little time not having to 
download/create them again. However, after some time all these saved files will 
make the conda-installation cluttered, taking up disk-space and possibly 
affecting performance. It is there a good practice to clean the conda 
installation from time to time. This done by typing:

```
conda clean --all
```

`conda` asks for verification for cleaning, then perform the cleaning and 
reports back.

## Exercises
1. Create an environment using the file [git.yaml](git.yaml). Activate the 
environment and test that you have access to the program by typing:

```
git git --version
```

Then deactivate the environment.  
Did it work? Did you get the right version?

2. Use a text-editor and create your own conda environment file `bedtools.yaml`,
 google or conda search to find a package for bedtools version x.y.z. and add 
 that to the environment file. Create the environment and activate it. Check
 that you can run bedtools.
3. Add `samtools` to the environment file and update the environment. Check 
that it worked. 
4. Deactivate and remove the environment.

Commit message:

Add link to course material

CondaCrashCourse/README.md, after:

# Conda Crash Course

**Todo:**

- extremely preliminary and needs major editing and polishing
- Maybe one exercise could be to install git/snakemake with conda?
- It would be neat if one could create a conda environment for a decent, 
*intuitive* cross-platform text-editor that have capabilities (correct 
indentation, code-formatting, etc.) to properly handle yaml- and 
snakemake-formatted files, at least, but preferably also markdown and maybe 
also python and R/Rmarkdown. `Atom` would be an alternative, but there is no 
conda-package for atom yet. Maybe a TODO could be to create an `atom` package 
-- or find an alternative editor. (`Emacs` is actually my editor of preference, 
but that fails the *intuitive* criterium... and so does ’vim’:)
- need feedback on how this works with Windows
- [Snakemake docs](https://snakemake.readthedocs.io/en/stable/getting_started/installation.html#installation-via-conda) recommends using the conda package `mamba` instead of plain `conda` (due to current problems with conda). Should this crash course follow that? I think `mamba` is meant to be a temporary fix so could be better to stick with `conda` to no over-complicate, but if it works better?

## Introduction to `conda`

Conda is a cross-platform system for software package management.
It greatly simplifies software installation on your computer.
Moreover, it allows, in a very simple way, creating project-specific 
environments with a selection of installed programs needed for a particular 
project. Each time work is performed on the project, the environent is 
activated, and when work is done done, the environment is deactivated the 
standard software environment for system is back.

Conda works on MacOS, Windows and Unix/Linux systems. This is handy for 
reproducibility as, in principle, a script developed inside a conda environment 
on, say, a Mac laptop can be transferred to, say, a linux system on UPPMAX, the 
corresponding conda environment for linux can be created and the script can be 
used there as well.

Conda packages of programs are available from different *channels*, including 
[anaconda](https://repo.anaconda.com) (often set as the `defaults` or `main` 
channel in conda), [conda-forge](https://conda-forge.org) and 
[bioconda](https://bioconda.github.io); all (or at least the majority of) 
channels are isted in the [anaconda cloud](https://anaconda.org)). A large part 
of the available open-source bioinformatics programs are covered by these 
channels. Commercial or other programs  with restricted license can typically 
not be provided by these channels -- however, for reproducibility, open source 
programs are a more natural choice.

It should be mentioned that, while `conda` is available for MacOS, Windows and 
Unix/Linux, certain packages may not be available for all platforms. This could 
be due to the actual program being platform-specific, to difficulties to port 
the program between platforms or to channel policies (*bioconda* not supporting 
Windows?).

## Additional info
There's also information about conda available in the **Tools in reproducible
research** [course material](https://nbis-reproducible-research.readthedocs.io/en/latest/conda/).


## Installation

Conda can be installed using the Miniconda installer. The installer is 
downloaded from [here](https://docs.conda.io/en/latest/miniconda.html); choose 
the installer appropriate for your operating system and download it.

Detailed instruction can be found [here](https://conda.io/projects/conda/en/latest/user-guide/install/index.html). 
but briefly, the downloaded file is a *bash* script or a Windows executable, 
respectably, which is executed and the user is guided through the installation.

**TODO: add info on checksums? overkill?**

Once you've followed the installation instructions the base conda environment
will be activated by default when you open up a new terminal window. You can 
see this by looking at your prompt which should be prefixed with `(base)` or
`(anaconda3)`. You can deactivate the base environment by running 
`conda deactivate` and re-activate it by running `conda activate`. Notice how
your prompt changes as you do this. See [more below](#activating-and-deactivating-an-environment) 
about activating and deactivating environments.

### Updating conda

Conda can be used to update itself, simply by typing:

```
conda update conda
```

### Local UPPMAX conda

On the UPPMAX clusters (e.g., )*rackham*, *bianca*, *snowy* and *irma*), 
`conda` is also available through the UPPMAX module system. This module provides
a *local* variant of `conda`, that i, it accesses local mirrors of the major 
bioinformatics-relevant *conda* channels (including *anaconda*, *bioconda*, and 
*conda-forge*; for a full listing do `conda config show channels`).

If your project involves human sensitive data and, hence, work on the secure 
cluster *bianca*, you will need to use this local `conda` module, as *bianca* 
does not have any internet connections. The UPPMAx local *cona* can be loaded 
(while on an UPPMAX cluster) simply by typing:

`module load conda`

Unloading the module is done by:

`module unload conda`

## Usage

### Finding a conda packages

To find out if there exists a conda packages for a certain package, the easiest 
way is actually to google `conda <package name>`. You can also search 
[Anaconda cloud](https://anaconda.org/) for packagaes 
directly. Pages for packages at *anaconda cloud* tells:

- which channel provides the packages
- which systems the package is provided for, and
- which version of the software the package provides (other versions can be 
found under the *files* tab or as described below).

`conda` itself can also be used to search for packages:

```
conda search --channel <channel> <package>
```

A drawback is that you need to tell conda what channel to search using the 
option `--channel` (although the option can be repeated in the same command to 
search in several channels at the same time, e.g., 
`conda search --channel bioconda --channel conda-forge <package>`).

#### Searching on UPPMAX

On UPPMAX, `conda` is set up to search *all* local channel mirrors, by simply 
typing:

```
conda search <package>
```

### Creating environment

Conda environments can be created indifferent ways. Since reproducibility is a 
major theme for these crash courses, we will here focus on the approach where a 
conda environment file is used. Separate conda environemnts files are used for 
separate environments. The environment file should be in `yaml` format and can 
look like this:

*file: smthg.yaml*
```
Name: smthg
# indentations are important and should be made up of spaces (soft-tabs).
channels:
  - anaconda
  - conda-forge
dependencies:
  - smthg =1.0.1
  - smthelse =1.5.3
```

Breaking down the content:
- The `name` is the name you want to call the conda environment. This could be, 
e.g., the name of the contained software or of the project it will be used in.
- Under `channels`, the channels that supply the required conda packages are 
listed. Several channels can be given, but it is good practice to only list 
those necessary -- avoid unnecessary safe-guarding!
- Finally, the required conda packages are listed under `dependencies`. Also 
here, several packages can be listed in the same file. Conda usually makes a 
good job in taking care of any incompatibilities between packages, and warns if 
it fails doing this.   
For reproducibility reasons it is good to also list the version of the software 
required. This is done by adding a ’=’ sign followed by the version (to find 
what versions are  as packages, `conda search` can be used, see above).

The conda environment is then created by

```
conda env create --file smthg.yaml
```

This will ask you to verify the installation, then perform it and report 
success or failure. Reasons for failure is most often due to:

- the name of the environment is already in use -- change environment name or 
remove the old environment (see below).
- A package is not available from the channel or not available for the 
platform (i.e., MacOS, Windows or Linux/Unix) -- correct channel or use another 
platform (e.g., UPPMAX).
- Versions of two or more packages, as required in the conda environment yaml 
file, are not compatible -- try with other versions. For example, a common 
incompatibility is that one package is built for `python 2` and another is built
 for `python 3` -- these are not compatible.

When setting up an environment for a new project it can be a good idea to 
**not** set explicit versions for packages, unless you know beforehand that your
project requires a specific version. This way you can let conda attempt to 
install the most up to date compatible versions for the listed packages. Once 
the environment is created you can update the environment file with the exact
versions that were installed (use `conda list` to see package versions for the
activated environment).

### Activating and deactivating an environment

A succesfully installed conda environment is activated by typing:

```
conda activate smthg
```

However, often `conda` will complain that it is not initiated for bash. this is 
done by typing:

```
conda init bash
```

Then retry the activation command. Now you will have access to the programs 
provided by the conda environment. You will also have access to the standard 
programs of your system, but if you have the same program in your standard 
system and in your conda environment, the one in the conda environment will be 
used.

The conda environment is deactivated by typing:

```
conda deactivate
```

The standard environment is then restored and the conda environment's software 
is not accessible.

### Updating an environment

To add additional packages to an environment:

1. First update the conda environment files in question by adding additional 
packages (and channels as needed) or change the version of existing packages.
2. Then type:

```
conda env update --file smthg.yaml
```

and the environment will be updated.


### Deleting an environment

Sometimes an outdated environment needs to be deleted. This is done by typing:

```
conda env remove --name smthg
```

`conda` then asks for verification, then deletes the environment and reports 
back.

### Keeping your conda clean

By default, conda saves all downloaded software tarballs (archives of source 
code), redundant packages (e.g., older, replaced versions) and index-cache 
because, in case they are needed, it might save a little time not having to 
download/create them again. However, after some time all these saved files will 
make the conda-installation cluttered, taking up disk-space and possibly 
affecting performance. It is there a good practice to clean the conda 
installation from time to time. This done by typing:

```
conda clean --all
```

`conda` asks for verification for cleaning, then perform the cleaning and 
reports back.

## Exercises
1. Create an environment using the file [git.yaml](git.yaml). Activate the 
environment and test that you have access to the program by typing:

```
git git --version
```

Then deactivate the environment.  
Did it work? Did you get the right version?

2. Use a text-editor and create your own conda environment file `bedtools.yaml`,
 google or conda search to find a package for bedtools version x.y.z. and add 
 that to the environment file. Create the environment and activate it. Check
 that you can run bedtools.
3. Add `samtools` to the environment file and update the environment. Check 
that it worked. 
4. Deactivate and remove the environment.
